Background & Significance
================
Ernesto Ramirez
March 1, 2016

-   [Current Research](#current-research)

### Current Research

The common theme among the human-computer interaction (HCI), personal informatics (PI), and public health and health behavior literature is a focus on introducing these new types of tools into the lives on participants in order to understand their usability, validity, and ability to serve as intervention tools. This research will propose to take a step back in order to examine real-world use of self-monitoring tools in the course of everyday life. There are already a large number of individuals who are using these tools on a daily basis to track, engage, and learn about their own behavior in real-time. Currently there exists a distinct lack of research that explores the “how” and “why” of physical activity tracking device use in populations that self-select to use them. In 2014 Fritz and colleagues conducted a qualitative inquiry into how individual use different activity tracking devices, explaining their rational for the study they stated,

“Investigating the experiences of people who have adopted these technologies “organically” and continued to use them over time offers the opportunity to study certain contexts and aspects of use not possible in shorter-term experimental deployments. It also affords the opportunity to see how findings of previous shorter studies hold over longer-term use.” (Fritz et al., 2014, p. 487)

Their research was based in-person and online audio interviews of 30 participants who had been using different devices (including Fitbit, Jawbone, and the Nike Fuelband among others) for at least three months. Their chosen method of identifying and assigning open and closed codes (identified through literature review) focused on observing general themes about device use, changes in use over time, and psychosocial and behavioral aspects of use. Through the interviewing, transcription, coding, and analysis process they identified six major themes: attachment to the devices and data, awareness of self and behavior, immediate impact of data capture and reflection in real-time, motivation and reflection, meeting goals and “getting credit”, using internal and external rewards, and the use of social support and community features. These findings build on the previous qualitative work by Li, Dey, and Forlizzi (Li, Dey, & Forlizzi, 2011), who interviewed 15 individuals who identified as self-trackers. These participants represented variety of data collection types including blood glucose, weight, sleep, physical activity, and productivity. The authors were able to identify six common questions that are present when people talk about their data collection and reflection processes. These six themes were: Status (“What is my current state?”), History (“What does my data indicate over a long period of time?”), Goals (“What should my goals be and how do I set them?”), Discrepancies (“How does my current status compare with my goal?”), Context (“What other information is related to my data?”), and Factors (“What changes my status over longer periods of time?”). The authors further break down the act of personal data collection into a two-phase structure: Discovery and Maintenance. The discovery phase is includes individuals who are focusing on their history, goals, context, and factors. They are unclear of what they should be focusing on pertaining to goals and/or do not understand what influences their behavior. On the other hand, the maintenance phase unsurprisingly features individuals who ask themselves primarily about status and discrepancies. That is they are maintaining to attempting to maintain their behavior by using a system to consistently check themselves against their identified goal(s). These studies, two of the few that explore the real-world behavior of individuals using new digital self-monitoring tools, primarily focus on using their findings to inform the future design of similar tools. Even with the rich data being discussed and collected by participants there is no evidence of how participants thoughts and ideas about their personal data collection practice matches (or does not match) with the actual data being collected.
